The next limited resource is the ability to do psychoanalysis, knowledge of psychology.
The ability to carefully carry out a pre-project analysis of the members of our team or the future team,
and the members of our team, with whom we will have to work in the project.
The ability to put on the skin of another person, to live in his image.
The ability to empathize.
This ability is called empathy in psychology.
Empathy is the ability to empathize.
A professional manager must have these resources, he must understand psychology, and he must have elements of empathy.
Before starting to work in a team with our employees, with other participants, we must live in the image of these employees, these participants.
If we do not know who we are dealing with, in what language to speak, what concepts to use,
then we can hardly call our communication skills, our process of interaction with the members of the team successful.
All this leads to the development of our limited resource, knowledge of psychology, psychoanalysis, and the possession of elements of empathy.
If we return to the basic definition of the project, we will see that this resource is very much in demand.
Let's remember that a project is an event aimed at creating a new product or service.
This means that there is an element of novelty in any project.
Now let's live in the image of limited resources.
First, the client, the participant of the project, and then the performer or general contractor.
If we carefully analyze this situation, then we become clear about the implementation of the turnover document, the production case, and so on.
It is clear that when the project is implemented, the client should not and cannot create a professional, high-quality technical task for the final product.
It seems to me that the situation is very interesting.
If we consider the interaction of two participants in the project, the client and the performer,
the performer, the contractor, approaches the client and asks,
«Tell me what you want. Give me a technical task».
Not «I want this, I don't know that, I will go there, I don't know where».
It seems to me that the requirements of the performer, the general contractor, are very reasonable.
The technical task should be prepared by the client.
However, if we carefully analyze the essence of the project, we will see that this approach is flawed.
Why? Because there is always an element of novelty in the project.
Even if it is small in some projects, it is there.
And when the client approaches this new element, it is new for him, he does not know it, he does not understand it.
He describes this element incorrectly, wrongly.
And these inaccuracies in the technical task will then emerge at the final phase of the project
and can emerge with very, very large negative consequences.
It is clear that the client cannot and should not create this part of the technical task.
He must delegate this responsibility to the professional.
And he did not choose this organization, these specialists, as a general contractor or performer in vain.
And they position themselves as professionals in this sphere, which is relatively new for the client.
From this we come to the conclusion that the technical task as a product should be formed jointly with the client and the performer.
Moreover, if we consider the formal side, then the consequences are very interesting.
If the client fully develops the technical task and gives it to the performer,
then the situation usually unfolds as follows.
The performer, without much effort, does everything in accordance with the technical task.
He will do both the part that is described by the client and which is new for the client.
And there are probably some inaccuracies.
They must be, by definition, a property of the project.
The performer will do it as a result, and there will be mistakes.
And the performer has a legal basis to close his shortcomings or appeal to the fact that he did everything in accordance with the technical task that the client gave him.
As they say, the performer says the following proverb.
You have seen what you have bought, eat at least as much as you can.
This is it.
Where did it come from?
From the fact that the client did not fully understand what a project is, what project activity is.
If he had allocated a little resource in this direction and thought about it, analyzed it,
he would have drawn up a draft of the technical task or a sketch and given it to the general contractor,
so that he would modify it and then return it to the approval or approval.
Moreover, in complex projects, experienced customers fully delegate this responsibility for the technical task to the general contractor.
Moreover, a resource is allocated in terms of time and finances, and this work is paid for.
Why?
Because a correct, professionally designed technical task contains a significant part of the solutions to the problems that are aimed at achieving the goal of the project.
As many teachers say in our high school, a correctly formulated task or question contains more than half of the answer to this question.
So, the technical task is, in fact, the formulation of the task, the formulation of the question.
And the quality of the technical task also depends on the success of the project.
Thus, we understand that by embodying the image of the customer, the image of the performer, the general contractor,
we immediately get a correction of our specific actions aimed at successfully reaching the project results.
This is done in order to minimize the conceptual risks of the project, which are often dominant in project activities.
The next quality that a project manager should have is that he must understand the essence of leadership.
If we look at the formation of a team of professionals, which can provide the maximum efficiency of the project,
we understand that we are talking about the maximum ROI, the return of investment to the project,
then a project manager should strive to have a team of leaders in a particular area, which is involved in project management,
and, above all, in the subject area.
It often happens that in practice, managers look at the leaders with some kind of jealous attitude.
It often happens that, due to their weakness, managers simply can't stand the fact that leaders appear in the team.
And they identify leadership.
In fact, leadership and leadership are two different entities.
We can make a brief analogy, although it is not exactly one-to-one, but we can compare the following situation.
A dog has a leader, and he leads the whole team.
All dogs in the team unconditionally obey the leader.
But the one who sits on the sledges controls all this.
That is, the ratio between leadership and leadership is approximately clear.
Although I emphasize that this is not exactly a one-to-one comparison, but the shades of the ratio between leadership and leadership are approximately clear.
On the other hand, a project manager is a person who is responsible for the administrative implementation of the project,
for the most effective organization and coordination of the project.
He has administrative and financial levers of management.
As for the subject matter of the project implementation, as for the narrow areas of activity,
of course, he delegates this to his team members at the professional level.
And, of course, if professionals are formed in the team, then they should focus on leadership in these areas of business, in these areas of the subject matter of the project.
And on leadership in a good understanding of this word, on leadership on a large scale.
That is, if we have a specialist in the project, a builder, an engineer-builder,
then, of course, he must perceive himself as a professional and at the same time strive to be an objective professional of the front line in this area of business, in this area of activity.
We should not somehow push or slow the aspirations of our team members to leadership.
On the contrary, we should instill the aspiration for leadership.
And if we have a team of project members, really from the leaders in certain areas, then the project will be implemented with maximum efficiency.
It is clear that the project leader should be a leader in the area of interaction within the team, first of all.
The project leader should create working conditions and activities for the team members in such a way that they reach the forefront of their professional field and become leaders.
Next, we will briefly consider some of the main roles in the project team and their functions.
Here on this slide you see an example of the organizational structure of the project team, or as we also say in project management, the Organization Breakdown Structure, OBS of the project.
Or sometimes we say that we are talking about the project office of the project.
There is also the concept of the project office of the enterprise, and we will discuss this aspect later.
Now we are talking about the project office of the project.
Here is a structured hierarchical scheme of the team members, roles, subordinates,
plus a table that carefully describes the functions of each role, plus information about the phone, fax, email, coordinates, physical coordinates of the location of this person.
All this in total can be called a project office.
In general, this structure describes the content of the entire team, and in this team, the red dots are those members who are engaged in management.
Management is a significant part of their functions.
In general, together with this part of the project management team, other employees and performers make up the project team.
If we talk about the hierarchical approach to the formation of this project structure, then the project experience shows that the method of unification in project management is more effective than the democratic management methods in the project team.
For example, if we manage the project using a democratic method, a democratic body, let's say 12 people gather as a team and manage the project, then such an approach, such a technology will be less effective if one person manages the project.
But at the same time, we must understand that the method of unification will be most effective if the head of the team is a high-level professional manager.
He is able to manage the project, organize the work in the team and successfully achieve the goals of the project.
In large and complex projects, the professionalism of the project manager is very much in demand.
In such a situation, in tandem with the project manager, the owners of the enterprise or the management of the enterprise put the curator of the project.
This role is most often introduced in projects where we are talking about a large-scale, large-capacity resources, large budget and high priority of the project.
The management wants to insure the process of the project, because the project manager may not be professional enough.
The situation may be similar to the situation in the Soviet Union, when the commissar worked with the commander.
This analogy is not entirely justified, but nevertheless, there is this element of the commander and the commissar.
Sometimes in some organizations, this tandem is introduced in such a way that the levers of project management are divided as follows.
The project manager has administrative levers of management, and the curator of the project is financial and economic.
The project manager is only engaged in administration, he can make suggestions and issue orders to change the team members, to introduce a certain role, to change functions, to divide functions, and so on.
But in this situation, the curator is the actual manager of the budget.
Sometimes the role of the curator combines the functions of a person who makes a responsible decision in the so-called stages of the project, or in significant points in time, or in the process of transition from one phase of the project to another.
In English-speaking literature, this role is often called a gatekeeper.
And from the point of view of project management, this is a person who really makes decisions when the project goes through these gates between phases, between one phase to another.
If it is necessary to carefully and accurately analyze and justify the purposefulness of the project transition from one phase to another, justify the next costs of the budget, resources,
then in this situation, the role of the curator of the project is already used, and the curator of the project has the authority to make decisions about the transition from one phase to another.
Nevertheless, if the professionalism of the project manager is sufficient, then it is preferable to have a structure in which the philosophy of unanimity is used.
This approach provides the maximum efficiency of the project, that is, the maximum return on investment, profitability, and maximum dividends.
And then we consider the role of the project manager as the only responsible performer for the overall coordination, for the overall achievement of the project goal, for the overall success of the project implementation.
Each project can be considered from the point of view of the subject area of design and the project management.
The structure of the project team or organizational structure of the project can also be divided into two parts, the subject area and the project management.
Both branches are subject to the project manager, and the subject branch is headed by an expert in complex projects.
I emphasize that in this course we mainly consider complex projects, so that listeners can understand that for such types of projects, complex and complex, such techniques are used.
And when it comes to less complex projects, you can always reduce all these technological and methodological costs.
Therefore, we consider our projects from the point of view of complexity.
In complex projects, we can always exclude the sub-projects, or we understand that any such complex project consists of individual bricks.
And if we talk about the concept of the project, its result, product or service, then it can also be formed from separate modules in such projects.
All this can be woven into a complex structure.
And here the role of the expert is in demand.
An expert is a responsible performer for the development of the architecture or concept of the project in the subject area.
The next role is the chief engineer of the project, or often abbreviated as a HIP.
The chief engineer of the project is responsible for the implementation of the concept of the project developed by the expert.
The chief engineer of the project makes all these conceptual decisions, organizes technical decisions and directs the implementation of the project in separate directions.
The next level, as you can see on the slide, is the engineers in separate directions.
And they specialize in a narrower area.
As we say, they are responsible for a separate project cell, for a separate component, or for the system, or for the project.
And all this is about the subject component.
For example, if we talk about the creation of a local computing network of a large building, let's say 18 floors, then this part consists of different subsystems.
For example, horizontal and vertical SKS, active network equipment, server economy, workstations, basic software, applied software, up to the fact that it is used separately for the information security system.
That is, this whole project in the subject area can be made up of separate modules, of separate subsystems.
And the implementation of this project in the subject area is headed by a separate engineer for each component.
And then the engineers of the brigade go to the executors, who implement the project.
As for the branch of management, in complex projects, the role of the main project manager is usually highlighted, or GMP.
Sometimes this role is called the project's leading manager.
If the project is really very complex and there are 50 people in the project team, sometimes there are 200 or more people in the project team,
then the functions in the project are limited to a narrower volume, as we say, they are cut more narrowly.
And then the roles in the project are limited by separate functions, and there are more and more of these roles.
That is, depending on the scale of the project, we introduce one or another role.
The larger the project, the more roles in the project team.
The smaller the project, the fewer roles in the project team.
It is clear that in a very simple project, the entire project team can be expressed in one person,
and this person will combine the roles of the project manager, the expert, the chief engineer, the chief manager, and so on.
But we said that we would consider projects that are complex and complex, and in these projects, the project teams are also quite large,
and the differentiation in functions, in roles, is quite narrow.
In large projects, in some situations, the main project managers are also included as the managerial branch,
this is the project manager.
In this slide, the project is not so large-scale, and the branch of management of the project's main manager is headed there.
And this project manager is subordinate to the following team members.
This is the project administrator, coordinator, line managers, and other managers, for example, the manager-economist,
manager-lawyer, manager-security, and so on.
It all depends on the project's functional orientation and how complex it is.
Now we will briefly discuss the main roles.
So, the project administrator.
This person is responsible for the implementation of the project turnover document.
The project administrator is responsible for the organization, creation, and provision of the database,
which works with the turnover document, with the documentation.
In enterprises without project management, and in which large and complex projects are implemented,
there are often conflicts of the following kind.
For example, we have 50 people in the team, and one of the team members, the administrator,
needed some document.
And this person starts looking for who has this document.
In the end, he finds who is calling this person, and at the other end of the line, he answers,
where are you? In Khurgada.
That is, he went on vacation.
Where is this document?
In my safe.
Oh, damn, I forgot the key.
I have it here.
And the situation is that we take the autogen, start cutting this safe, and there is no document.
And the whole process is delayed.
What is it?
This is a reduction in the project's efficiency.
Read ROI.
It is clear that we are devaluing not only in the sense of profitability, but also other dividends.
For example, the rename of the organization.
If another legal entity has requested such a document, and we cannot find it within two weeks,
while we are positioned as general contractors, specialists in the field of management,
it is clear what we are talking about.
And how other legal and physical entities will react to us after that.
In the same organizations where the project management system is present,
and where the project management system works, at least partially,
other technologies are used to eliminate these shortcomings and sources of risk.
Management risks.
In these organizations, as a rule, a database is formed for any complex project that is opening up.
And it is formed very clearly and structurally.
All sections are distributed and built in a certain hierarchy.
All sections have a certain access right only to those participants who have a relationship to this section, and so on.
This database includes all the documents that were developed in the initiation phase,
planning, execution of the project, and completion.
That is, there are all the documents that describe the project, the project documentation.
We put everything there.
This database includes technical tasks, the technical work of the project,
the invoice, invoice accounts, financial and economic documentation,
correspondence, external and internal,
templates, forms, and regulatory documents that relate to this project.
In the West, many companies have a kind of electronic circulation document.
And there, specialists have long come to the conclusion that this kind of circulation document is more effective, fast, and reliable.
Let's say, if you use a paper circulation document, then, of course, it is a precious pleasure.
Because all the documents that are on paper, of course, we can translate them into electronic form and use them in the electronic version.
In many organizations in the West, there are no printers, no faxes, no other xero-copying equipment.
In general, the circulation document is not paper.
In this situation, the role of the project administrator is due to the fact that this person is engaged in the escort of the electronic circulation document, database, and so on.
In Russia, we often use a mixed circulation document.
For a number of reasons, we use both a paper and an electronic circulation document.
Nevertheless, if an organization switches to project management methods, and if it strives to increase the performance of management,
then it understands that it cannot do without an electronic circulation document.
And in this situation, the project administrator can use any documents, even if they are on paper, they are translated into electronic form.
In this situation, if one of the team members needs a particular document, then, in accordance with the rights of access, he can take this document at any time.
He understands where it is, there is a clear description of the structure, database, circulation document scheme.
In this situation, the efficiency of the production process increases significantly.
The project administrator monitors the current state of the database.
If a new document appears, it must be transferred to the database within a given time.
The next role is the project coordinator.
The project coordinator is usually responsible for two directions.
The first direction is that this person, this role, functions as a function of the organization and the organization of events, discussions, meetings, etc.
This person clarifies the initiative of the event, the agenda, who will make reports from which organizations,
then he will agree with the participants, legal and physical persons, the time and place of this event.
This person is responsible for the organization, he can be responsible for the organization of the event,
demonstration materials, distribution materials, up to the coffee break.
And, of course, he is responsible for the result of this event, and this result is usually expressed in the protocol of the meeting or meeting.
As we have already said, the management's axiom states that we must move from ambiguity to unambiguity.
This means that such events as meetings must have some result at the end,
and this is often the protocol of meetings.
In other words, there was no meeting without a protocol of meetings.
That is, if we did not see the protocol of the meeting, then the resources that were spent on the implementation of this event were thrown into the wind.
This is from the point of view of the quality of the document, the turnover, accountability and the general business of the project.
On the other hand, having received the protocol, the responsible performer, in this situation the coordinator of the project,
is obliged to transfer this result to another process at the entrance, namely, to the project administrator.
That is, the project administrator is obliged to receive the protocol and place it in the corresponding section of the database.
You see that I, considering each of the roles of the team members,
I start describing it with the main function, namely, I say that this role is the responsible performer for this or that function.
And on the example of the interaction of the coordinator and the administrator,
we saw how one responsible performer transfers the result of his work to another responsible performer,
and we understand that the processes of interaction and organization of work in the team are very important,
and we must carefully schedule, model and implement them.
The second function of the project coordinator is most often the function that he is a responsible performer
or is the entry point, as we often say, of the contact person for this project in this organization.
I will remind you once again that if we consider a complex project,
then, as a rule, a large number of legal entities, a large number of project participants take part in such projects.
For example, if we have an investor, a customer, a general contractor and several subcontractors,
it is clear that for the organization of such a large number of enterprises, it is necessary to clearly distribute,
and with whom we will interact on the issues of this project in such and such an organization.
As a result, the project manager sends an information letter to all legal entities with information
that in such and such an organization, the request to contact such and such a person with all the issues,
here are his coordinates, phone number, fax, email, even physical location,
and then we have a systematic interaction between project participants, between legal entities.
And this function is performed by the project coordinator.
If the project is complex, then in the separate component of the subject area,
the volume of organizational work increases to such an extent that the engineer is a specialist in the subject area.
He cannot cope with all aspects of the organization in this project or in this subsystem.
For example, if we have an engineer in the field of network equipment,
and this equipment is very large, then the main function of this role is to make a quality, professional specification for this equipment,
so that this subsystem works reliably, so that it is viable and is coordinated with other subsystems.
And the processes and events that are aimed at tracking the quality of the order of this equipment,
so that there is no failure in the specification when placing this equipment on the order,
so that there are minimum risks among the optimal suppliers,
so that we have minimum risks in the configuration, delivery, sorting, testing, installation of this equipment on the final objects.
Of course, this is a huge amount of work, and it is entrusted to the linear managers in this direction.
As a rule, such linear managers work in tandem with linear engineers in the direction,
and they provide this subsystem, this element of the project,
organizing all processes that are aimed at achieving the general goal of the project.
Thus, we have briefly considered the main roles of the project team members and their main functions.
The third block of the project management discipline is the management process.
I will briefly remind you what we mean by the process.
We understand the next approach under the process approach.
At the input, we have input information, input data, input resources.
Then we convert these resources, information, data, through technologies, methods, tools and specialized resources.
At the output of the process, we get the result, converted input resources, already in a new form, in a new quality or quantity.
In general, if we turn to the general philosophy of our approach,
we said at the very beginning that the basis of project management and the approach to projects is as follows.
We consider the whole project as a single phenomenon.
It is reasonable to consider the project management process as a single one.
Although in many methods, methods and even national standards,
we can see that the description of projects in methodological approaches applies the division of this phenomenon into separate components.
It is said that several processes can be considered in a project.
However, we understand that this is not quite a systematic approach.
In our case, a systematic approach will be more effective when we consider the whole process of project management.
I will briefly remind you what we understand under the systematic approach.
First of all, under the systematic approach, we understand that we cover the phenomenon, the subject that we study,
with which we interact, on which we work, in full.
We do not leave any details, all details are taken into account.
This approach can be characterized from the point of view of the coverage.
That is, the systematic approach implements the coverage of the object of management.
On the other hand, the systematic approach implies that we study the object of management or manage this object
according to a clearly defined strategic and tactical scheme.
In practice, this is realized thanks to the created model of the process,
or often called the business process.
Thus, the whole sequence of work on the object, interaction with the object, is clearly regulated and prescribed.
And we can say in this case that we work systematically.
Here are the main parcels when we consider the third block of the project management discipline, the management process.
Usually, the project management process is divided into 5 stages.
The first stage is initiation, the second is planning, the third is organization and control of the work,
the fourth stage is analysis and regulation, and the fifth stage is completion.
In short, if we give the general characteristics of these stages,
we can say that the initiation stage allows us to approach the beginning of a particular process
or a process as a whole.
At the initiation stage, we consider the strategic purpose of the beginning of the process,
its justification, strategic approaches, technological solutions, methodological solutions.
And in general, we consider whether we have the opportunity to successfully implement the project in the current situation,
taking into account the external and internal factors of the project environment.
All this is the content of the first stage, the initiation stage.
The second stage is planning, the stage of the project management process,
at which we determine how we will organize and execute the project.
The next stage is the implementation of our planned developments,
organization and control of the work, and the solution of the tasks,
with which we achieve the goal of the project.
During the implementation of these tasks, we carry out an analysis of their implementation and adjust it.
We make corrections in order to implement the project more effectively.
Let me remind you that under the term efficiency, we understand that the return on investment,
profitability, dividends will be maximum, that is, the costs will be minimal.
This all applies to the fourth stage of the project management process,
and the fifth stage includes the completion of the project and, in fact, everything related to the completion of the project,
not only the project, but also the individual parts of the project, or individual phases of the project, individual sub-processes.
That is, we draw up the results, create a final document, analyze the results,
and draw conclusions and recommendations for the next actions,
or for the implementation of sub-processes, or for the implementation of the next projects similar or adjacent to our field of activity.
It should be noted that there is a fundamental difference between the division of the project into phases.
Phases are related to the life cycle of the project,
and the life cycle of the project and the phases of the project are, first of all, the quantities that affect the chronology,
the chronological development of the project, that is, the phases are tied to time.
The stages of the project management process are directly tied to time,
and there is no direct dependence on the chronology.
Here the division is based on the content, on the essence of the work that we are doing in the project.
If we consider the stages of the project management process,
then each of these five stages can prescribe, for example, the phase of planning the project, development,
or the conceptual phase, or the phase of implementation, or the phase of completion.
That is, we can consider each phase of the life cycle in this method, dividing it into five stages.